# Celtic Tiger, Chinese Dragon (case)

|Case | Comments|
|:--- |:---------------------------- |
|It was in the company's DNA to establish a development centre in the heart of China. <br/>Bottom-line cost control was important, but in the ‘enterprise’ space revenue was king<br/> and the company already ran lean production teams in its western centres. The management team's<br/>traditional emphasis was on the top line; new sales, big deals, big customers, big-new-<br/>customers. They had achieved this in the past by being close to the customer. Now projects<br/>in China were beginning to dwarf those in European and American markets; Chinese semi-<br/>states and private corporations were investing heavily in IT infrastructure. In the end the<br/>decision was straightforward. Of all the developing markets China was the biggest and<br/>growing fastest.<br/> | |
|**Excerpts from interviews with a Senior Software Engineer (Chinese) from another<br/>company and the Director of Product Management (Beijing).**<br/> **(Director of Product Management)** <br/>"Establishing a development centre in Beijing was a dream project in many ways. For a<br/>merger or acquisition you have to work 'after the fact' with a pre-established team. In Beijing it<br/>was a clean slate, new hires, using our 'foreign' methodology."<br/>"...one of the reasons was it [the Beijing office] added value to the company. If we think about<br/>the four of five possible strategies for a mid-tier tech company, well, having a foothold in<br/>China - high profile, high value projects - it ticks all the boxes."<br/>"When you set up an office in China or India, there's a fear among people at the home base!<br/>You immediately create the potential for a social divide that applies when you move to an<br/>offshore site."<br/> | The reference to a possible social divide<br/> could become a source for the lack<br/> of support quoted in the GOO handbook;<br/> "*Captive centers, however, have been <br/>struggling with ever-increasing costs, <br/>high employee attrition levels <br/>and the lack of integration with the <br/>firm’s global strategy, and at times<br/> a lack of headquarters support.*"<br/> (Oshri et al., 2009, p.242, para. 4) <br/> | 
|"Do you want a situation where you say 'designed in California, made in China'? What does<br/>that say about a social divide in the company? That's the choice you have to make."<br/>"Our core methodologies and practices are Scrum/Agile so we decided to use Scrum from the<br/>start. The local engineers looked on it as a 'foreign' methodology, but no resistance and open<br/>to learning about it."<br/> | | 
|"My view is that Agile is a strict discipline; it's more disciplined that other methods if you do it<br/>in a highly structured way, get rid of the 'ad hoc' style that seems to be associated with it.<br/>Start your stand-ups at 10am (not 5 past 10), finish strictly at 10:15am. The stand-up<br/>conversation should be structured; specific challenges approaching, specific problems you<br/>are facing, you've either run or written a test case. Programming's like that, there's 'do or<br/>don't', 'did or didn't', no ambiguity and you need these type of conversations, Agile brings this<br/>to the front. But I was worried Agile could create problems with 'face', engineer's admitting to<br/>difficulty or failing to achieve something."<br/> | The strict approach to Agile may fly <br/>in the face of advice from The GOO handbook;<br/> "*Concentrate on what needs to be accomplished, <br/>not on how to get there. <br/>Imposing detailed control of processes<br/> will constrain the innovators. <br/>Buyers should understand that <br/>true innovations are not linear <br/>but complex and chaotic, often entailing spurts,<br/> frustrations, and sudden insights.*"<br/>   (Oshri et al., 2009, p.153, para. 5) <br/> But the approach may not apply to <br/>people involved in innovation? | 
|**(Senior Engineer)** <br/>"In China software engineering career has quite a lot of respect. In general, software<br/>engineers work long hours, often seven days a week, starting early, leaving late. International<br/>companies might have more formal policies, leave work at 7pm, come back in the morning.<br/>But not as flexible as smaller companies, usually working around a project, if an emergency<br/>comes in they might have to work all night."<br/> |  | 
|"Now Agile and Scrum are well known in China. In the real implementation there are some<br/>cultural differences that might make it feel different to an implementation in the US."<br/>"Let me put it this way; In western countries, people like to treat work like playing games. A<br/>manager here is something like the parent, not the children. People don't accept the childish<br/>approach. Engineers think 'we are not kids, we are adults'. So Agile can inspire in the West<br/>because it is playful, but in China?..."<br/> | The product manager and the Engineer have <br/>similar views of Agile, the product manager <br/>mentions "*getting rid of the ad-hoc style*",<br/> and the senior engineer mentions <br/>Agile as being "*playful*".<br/> It appears that the approach being taken<br/> by the product manager will<br/> be compatible with the Chinese <br/>way of doing business. | 
|**Related Industry Data**<br/>• Agile 101 - Methodologies, Learn more about Scrum, XP, DSDM, FDD and Lean<br/>software development (www.infoq.com).<br/>• Understanding Chinese business culture: potential starting points for developing an<br/>understanding of guanxi (relational) and mianzi (face/status/rank) on wikipedia.org or google<br/>search.<br/>| |

## Readings

Note:
Oshri et al., (2009) Chapter 10, Emerging Issues in Sourcing Strategy, content is redistributed in the 4th edition (Oshri et al., 2023) as follows; Chapter 5 Supplier Configurations and Capabilities (for Bundling Services), Chapter 11 Captive and Shared Service Centres, Chapter 12 Innovation through Outsourcing).

(Virtuos, unknown) <br/>


#### If He Just Knew Who We Were
"*In the absence of a single employing entity, individuals construct a network of attach ments as a means of alleviating the experience of transitional and uncertain employment (Petriglieri et al., 2019). Microworker involvement with an online community can enhance psychological safety, just as seeking support is a means of resisting victimisation in precarious workplaces (Alberti et al., 2018). Attachment to supportive online sites also provides information and shared experiences of specific platforms, thus tangibly reducing the inherent ambiguity of the employment relationship.*" (Panteli et al., 2020) <br/>
Reminds me of Self-Organisation topic discussed in our Business Enquiry module (Kavanagh, 2024) with similar organisation taking place in cryptocurrency industry as we observed during Ethereum Ecosystem module (Dylan-Ennis, 2025).  

"*We add to this evidence by showing how such nascent collectivisation serves a particular purpose in the absence of conventional employer relationships, with strong bonds of attachment to the community energising workers’ collective response to exploitation (Webster, 2016). Vitally, this encourages voice in an environment where individuals may fear speaking out due to the potential consequences for their income (Howcroft and Bergvall-Kåreborn, 2018). Thus, cultivating community identity may mobilise microworkers, as already found among other gig economy workers (Woodcock, 2018).*"  (Panteli et al., 2020) <br/>
Again I can refer to another module, Cultural & Political Perspective (Kelly, 2025) when we learned about Structuration Theory (Giddens, 
1984), and to last weeks class where we touched on Culture as Routinisation; Panteli et al. (2020) shows how, despite the different views shared in the letters, individuals came together to introduce protections for each other, filling the gaps they expect to see in a normal employer / employee relationship.     

#### Missing Women
*"the clustering of economic activity, which is predominantly city based, is linked to the reorganization of international companies pursuing new markets, and this spatial reconfiguration means many women turn to home-based employment or telework. These informal employment activities provide key sources of income and hence degrees of independence, but they supply capitalism with flexible, extremely cheap, and unprotected labor."* (Gillard et al., 2008, p. 263, para. 3) <br/>
Written in 2008 I wonder if the the shift to remote working has helped to balance the scales in women's favour, and if it has will the progress made be washed away by current strategies to pull workers back into the office.

"*At the heart of low-cost production for global markets is “flexible production” and women are seen as the most flexible labor supply in terms of their willingness to accept temporary contracts and unstable working conditions.*" (Gillard et al., 2008, p. 268, para. 4) <br/> 
I think this is an important point. There is still, at least in my case, an expectation that men should provide. This is not just an external expectation but also comes from an internal feeling of that is where men's value lies. I am sure there are many women who will also have a built-in feeling that their value is in providing care for the family. Yet the opposite has been proven to work; women stepping up in World War 2 to take on full time industrial work, more recently 'stay at home' dads and highly successful women in business, that is to say **published** accounts of successful women; there are many historical accounts of women who are only recognised today for their work with some interesting accounts from Helen Lewis (2025). But our mindset tends towards so called traditional roles which brings me back to a passage earlier in the paper about Social Construction:<br/>
"*Individuals are born and immediately classified as female or male, and over time acquire a gendered identity, that is, what it means to be feminine or masculine (Elson, 1995). Both gendered concepts are relational (Wajcman, 1998), that is, they are construed in relation to each other by defining what the female is not in relation to the Western masculine norm; this varies from one environment to another and shifts over time.*" (Gillard et al., 2008, p. 264, para. 5) <br/>
The challenge with changing Social Construction is that it takes time, maybe a generation, maybe longer, but it does need constant attention, research, and discourse.

"*Underlining the assembly-line nature of the work, employers require flexible working with shifts, which frequently prevents women with families from taking jobs during off-peak hours. So while globalization may have brought new opportunities to young women with familiarity in English in the new service sector jobs, it has imposed homogeneous and culturally specific work practices and made large numbers of older women redundant in the manufacturing sector.*" (Gillard et al., 2008, p. 271, para. 1) <br/>
"*Women may have made notable progress into highly skilled work such as software programming in Brazil, India, and Malaysia, yet nowhere are these jobs held by a majority of women;womenworkingintheseareas comprise a small, educated elite (Hafkin & Taggart, 2001)*" (Gillard et al., 2008, p. 271, para. 2) <br/>
Are we seeing this imbalance as a result of failing to attract women into engineering/technical education at the outset? Even if so it does not explain the disparity in salaries when women do take up these roles.

"*CCNA program managers, instructors, and students found that employers were reluctant to recruit women, perceiving them as poorly qualified and lacking critical work experience.*"  (Gillard et al., 2008, p. 272, para. 1) <br/>
From my own recent experience I found male candidates more likely to enhance their skills or bluff answering a technical question, female candidates less so and prepared to respond with "I don't know". Honesty, not technical excellence, was key to the successful candidate taking up the role.<br/><br/>

Overall the Gillard et al. paper (2008) reveals a complex relationship between culture, globalisation, and women's recognition for the roles they play. The impact on pay and opportunities is particularly disturbing and demands action by organisations to ensure they are not contributing to the inequalities described, on the contrary they should be working to eliminate them.

#### GOO Handbook, Chapter 10
"*The downside of cloud computing is that companies have limited control over their basic IT services and databases. They may suffer loss of access to their data when there is a problem in the cloud or with the physical infrastructure of the cloud. Privacy and confidentiality issues have also increasingly become a concern, especially when clients use service providers in a different country, where the local law may allow the government of that country to access certain data stored on hosted servers.*" (Oshri et al., 2009, p. 146, para. 3) <br/>
Despite the recognition of the downsides to cloud computing in 2009 we still have organisations who find it surprising when they cannot control when their systems are upgraded, or be able to see why an incident in Sweden is affecting their serivice in Dublin, and still some believe that where their data is held is of no real consequence. <br/>

Making the choice between captive centers and third-party vendors; "*two criteria are critical in making the sourcing choice:*"
"*1. Whether, at the time of the decision, third-party vendors of a particular service have the human and operational capabilities as well as the scale and scope to match a client’s long-term needs.
2. Whether the client perceives a value-creation opportunity in building an offshore capability that could potentially be sold off for a profit.*" (Oshri et al., 2009, p.148, para. 2) <br/>

"*Moreover, most of the profits from the PC architecture have migrated upstream to the supplier of the microprocessor (Intel) and the operation system (Microsoft). The experience of IBM shows that key development activities that depend on one another must be conducted in-house to capture the rewards from long term R&D investments.*" (Oshri et al., 2009, p.151, para. 2) <br/> 

"*Concentrate on what needs to be accomplished, not on how to get there. Imposing detailed control of processes will constrain the innovators. Buyers should understand that true innovations are not linear but complex and chaotic, often entailing spurts, frustrations, and sudden insights.*"   (Oshri et al., 2009, p.153, para. 5) <br/> 

### References
*Dylan-Ennis, P. (2025). MIS41220-The Ethereum Ecosystem. Michael Smurfit Graduate Business School, Dublin. Spring Trimester 2024/25.* <br/>
*Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration. University of California Press. https://go.exlibris.link/6whbVdNc* <br/>
*Gillard, H., Howcroft, D., Mitev, N., & Richardson, H. (2008). ‘Missing women’: Gender, ICTs, and the shaping of the global economy. Information Technology for Development, 14(4), 262–279. https://doi.org/10.1002/itdj.20098* <br/>
*Kavanagh, D. (2024). MIS40910: Skills for Business Enquiry. Michael Smurfit Graduate Business School, Dublin. Autumn Trimester 2024/25.* <br/>
*Lewis, H. (2025). The Genius Myth: A Curious History of a Dangerous Idea. Penguin Publishing Group. https://books.google.ie/books?id=3CBJEQAAQBAJ*<br/>
*Oshri, I., Kotlarsky, J., & Willcocks, L. (2009). The handbook of global outsourcing and offshoring. In Palgrave Macmillan UK eBooks. Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230251076* (Chapter 10 Emerging issues in sourcing strategy)<br/>
*Oshri, I., Kotlarsky, J., & Willcocks, L. (2023). The handbook of global outsourcing and offshoring (4th 2023). Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-12034-3* <br/>
*Panteli, N., Rapti, A., & Scholarios, D. (2020). If He Just Knew Who We Were: Microworkers’ Emerging Bonds of Attachment in a Fragmented Employment Relationship. Work, Employment and Society, 34(3), 476–494. https://doi.org/10.1177/0950017019897872* <br/>
*Virtuos, (unknown). Living and Working in Xi'an; China’s Historic Old Capital.* <br/>

## Links
Ref. Reading 10c: <br/>
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtuos<br/>
* https://www.virtuosgames.com/careers/ <br/>

Search for 996 working hours <br/>
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/996_working_hour_system#cite_note-auto2-16 <br/>
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/09/28/business/996-hustle-culture-tech.html <br/>
