# Keeping PACE with the local (case) 


|Case|Comments|
|--- |--- |
|The objective stated in PACE's original business plan was to give client companies access to best-in-area programming and testing capability through offshore outsourcing to India. PACE's strategy leverages their own specialised knowledge and capabilities to manage globally distributed engineering teams. They deliver talented people, lower costs, and faster turnaround for software projects. | |
|**PACE** applies a **2-stage model** for client onshore/offshore transitions (figure 1); the <mark>first year of the contract is conducted onshore working closely with the client on-site</mark> after which the project <mark>transitions swiftly to an off-shore operation</mark>. The **value proposition to clients** is threefold and simple: <mark>project cycle time, management overhead and employee cost reductions </mark>will occur because the Indian team has access to more people, at lower cost, and working across European and American time zones. An added benefit is that project work continues around the clock if necessary.| | 
|In its first 18 months of operation PACE has secured 2 European mid-sized software product development firms as clients. A further three prospective clients are nearing contract signing and they have a qualified pipeline of 12 new potential clients. Both of the **active contracts are for an initial three-year duration with an option to extend**. The first client contracted 60 personyears (over three years) and the second 45 (over three years). The first client company develops products that enable customers to create distributed cross-platform information systems. The second client company's products service secure point-of-sale (POS) transactions and payment validation. Both clients state that the partnership with PACE will allow them to scale; they need more engineers to grow their own business, to handle the needs of existing customers, and to create new products addressing new market opportunities. <mark>PACE's engineers are intended to service the companies' legacy products</mark>, basically they take on support, maintenance, and patch production. | When actual customer contracts are compared to the financial figures shown in the projections there seems to have been an assumption that the clients won't require additional onshore knowledge gathering. I would expect that clients will plan continued developments and hand-over current products for BAU management to the supplier. That also assumes that the clients will re-sign after the 3 year contract is up. <br/> <br/> Any new clients will also incur the initial phase 1 costs, the more of these running concurrently the more stress is put on the bottom line as surplus is very tight at this stage. I wonder if there is negotiating room for a more balanced cost model where the clients can carry more of the burden of the initial phase. <br/> By charging the clients more in the first phase they will also be encouraged to move to phase 2 on time so as to reap the cost savings. | 
|PACE's business plan specifies an IRR (internal rate of return) of between 30% and 50% for its investors, a simple payback period for the original investment of just 2 years, plus annual growth potential of up to 50%. The **up-front (sunk) setup cost was 100k**. The firm's **fixed costs included 2 full-time sales and marketing roles** (both based in Europe), **in addition there are 3 employees based in India** tasked with sourcing and vetting candidate CVs, arranging interviews with client companies (online and via conference calls), visa processing, and other home-base activities aimed at supporting the eventual offshore transitions for projects moving to India. These on-going **fixed costs** (including accommodation, service charges, travel etc.) **amount to around 160k per annum.** | | 
|Both current clients are nearing the end of the first contract year with teams of 20 and 15 <br/> PACE engineers respectively working in onshore mode; however both <mark>**companies are now expressing a desire to delay (if not a reluctance to proceed to) the next stage**</mark> - transitioning to offshore operations! To complicate the situation the <mark>**Indian engineers were hired with a clear expectation of returning to India**</mark>; relocation to Europe is seen as a temporary assignment. <mark>**Ambiguity surrounding return dates is becoming a source of dissatisfaction**</mark>. Many had signed on because they <mark>wanted, eventually, to work near home, family and friends. **European Winters are cold and wet**, the **cost of living is high and food, lifestyle, and cultural difference** are a source of **personal and family stress**.</mark> <br/><br/>Delays in transitioning clients to full offshore outsourcing mode could have a major impact on PACE's business model. Simply put, the company's expected net <mark>revenue (surplus) for each contracted engineer is **5k per year** while the engineer is working **onshore**</mark> at the client site, whereas it is <mark>**25k per engineer per year** after the project transitions to full **offshore mode**</mark>. In onshore mode the company is barely able to meet its operating costs let alone accumulate surpluses for profit sharing (a promised employee incentive) or provide a return to investors. <mark>The company needs to transition clients to full offshore mode if it is going to do more than survive.</mark> | 15 Eng p/y + 20 E p/y = 35,   <br/> 35@5k p/y = 175K,  <br/> 35@25k p/y = 875K,  <br/> Expected surplus over 2 years = 1,050 <br/> **Client behaviour risks 700k for 2nd year**.<br/><br/> Supplier needs penalty clause to apply punitive charges to clients who delay phase 2.<br/> As an incentive to engineers who remain onshore some of the punitive charges should be allocated to them as a form of profit sharing, this should be greater than if they had returned to home on time. | 

<br/><br/>  
## Reading

“Using an in-depth, longitudinal case study of an offshore outsourcing engagement, we develop and explain a transition process model, consisting of three phases – familiarize, adapt and accelerate. For each phase, the model identifies dominant organizational processes, key factors and triggering condition for progression to the next phase.” (Abstract)
“For instance, after an outsourcing contract is signed, client personnel need to transfer knowledge, experiences and routines to vendor personnel (Carmel and Tjia 2005), who need to absorb these and learn to replicate outsourced activities. Learning, during transition, takes places on two dimensions: learning to perform outsourced tasks such as client-specific application development activities (Chua and Pan 2008) etc. and learning to adapt organizational setting, for example, restructuring retained organization (at client firm) (Feeny and Willcocks 1998) or mirroring client’s structure (at vendor firm) (Oshri et al. 2007).” (p. 2, para. 2)

“Furthermore, vendor personnel face difficulties with learning as client personnel, who possess much of the knowledge that needs to be transferred lack motivation (for instance, due to job insecurity) (Cullen and Willcocks 2003). Finally, with limited transfer and insufficient learning, adaptation – in the form of modified structures or processes at either firm is challenging to perform, increases risks and can lead to costly mistakes (Williams 2007).” (p. 2, para. 2)

 

“The challenges arise, primarily, due to three reasons. First, identifying potential outsourcing projects that are about to begin transition requires tracking several projects that might currently be in contract negotiations stage, which firms are generally not willing to share until the deals are closed. Second, the delay introduced while getting access to a case (due to any bureaucratic or hierarchical approval process, which are very common) can lead to transition stage already more than half-way finished. Finally, client and vendor practitioners are usually not keen to approve a study of their transition stage in order to avoid highlighting any errors or mistakes made by their firms.” (p. 3, para. 2)

“Their primary concern, with outsourcing (and specifically offshore outsourcing), was related to shifting the control, on outsourced activities, from their managers to vendor personnel and the risk of loosing this control. These workshops reinforced UtilCo’s initial preference to adopt a staged approach (vs. big bang) to shift control slowly as the vendor gains experience of their operations and organization.” (p. 5, para. 3)

“While resources from Global Vendor were ready to receive knowledge transfer, UtilCo’s management had not sufficiently planned for the availability of their contractors, especially as these contractors had to continue working on their operational activities along with conducing knowledge transfer sessions. While the knowledge transfer for both maintenance and development activities was initially planned in two stages of one month each, but it was hastened because of increased pressure as key contractors from UtilCo were leaving and were not inclined to transfer their knowledge:” (p. 6, para. 3)

“This involved moving low complexity and low volume of work to explore and determine a suitable operating model between UtilCo and Global Vendor. This phase is referred as adapt – because its objectives were: (a) for both UtilCo-Global to critically evaluate and modify the operating model between them, (b) for Global Vendor, to gain in-depth knowledge and understanding of UtilCo’s specific applications and (c) for UtilCo, to reorganize and redefine the roles and responsibilities of its retained personnel. This phase lasted for over four months from early-Oct 2007 to early-mid 2008.” (p. 7, para. 3)

“For Pilot-M, the team consisted mainly of 5 onshore personnel, while the 3 offshore personnel were back in India for the month of Oct (due to visa-related issues)” (p. 7, para. 6)

““There is difference between how onsite team works and how offshore works… offshore I think is a kind of more mature in terms of communication protocols. If I am the project manager, I have a one team lead and then a set of developers. So we have a set of protocols that this is how the communication would flow… wherein, I felt that this was a little bit missing in our counterparts at onsite. During the pilot, I would say there was an overload of communication which we raised and got resolved later” [Global Vendor, Project Lead – Offshore]” (p. 8, para. 1)

“…I think communicating with them is very hard…normally when we create a design here and if you have any question you just walk over and talk with the person…but through email and phone it’s much harder.” [Global Vendor, Project Lead – Offshore]” (p. 8, para. 1)

“One thing that I observed is that their [UtilCo’s organizational] structure internally is very, very complex…” (p. 8, para. 2)
•	To me the client may be outsourcing based on idea that they will move problems to the supplier. They should have examined their organization as a first step in the decision process to use outsourcing. They could have identified the complexity of their communications and the unclear roles in the organization structure, these could have been addressed which may have lessened the need for outsourcing but certainly would have made the transition to outsourcing much easier for both parties.
  
“three specific adaptive measures were taken: (a) introduction of a single point of contact (SPoC), (b) clear responsibility for initiating discussion during any communication and (c) several review checkpoints in the delivery process.” (p. 8, para. 3)

“Around end-Oct, they had already released over 30 contractors but a few still remained. After assessing the situation carefully, UtilCo’s management learned and understood the need for several changes in their retained organization in order to adapt it for successfully working with Global Vendor.” (p. 10. Para. 2)

“This phase is referred as accelerate – because its objectives were: (a) to swiftly validate the recent modifications at both the firms with simulated service delivery stage conditions (i.e. with performance level expectations as in actual service delivery, see Figure 1) and (b) to allow both firms to acquire sufficient experience and maturity with the setup (i.e. modified roles and delivery processes) to expedite reaching service delivery stage.” (p. 11, para 3)
“From UtilCo’s perspective, to reach managed services, it was critical to implement and test the redefined roles in its retained organization. Therefore, from mid-Feb onwards, these roles and responsibilities were unofficially applied for administering operations during the simulated managed services state. This was implemented in parallel with the ramp-down of the few remaining contractors, which further increased pressure on the retained personnel. Initially, applying this reorganization presented two challenges: it created anxiety among UtilCo’s retained personnel with regard to their job security and it required them to, for a certain period, manage twin roles (earlier one as well as the redefined one), thereby somewhat overwhelming them.” (p. 12, para. 2)
Familiarize: “Methods or mechanisms (such as job shadowing) (Chua and Pan 2008) and tools (such as, some knowledge management system) (Alavi and Leidner 2001) are required to effectively transfer and track knowledge under a constrained time period. The phase ends when vendor personnel achieve reasonable knowledge levels to start operational performance mode, involving low complexity and low volume of work.” (p. 13, para. 2)
Adapt: “The phase ends when both firms, to a large extent, are confident in their structural arrangements and vendor personnel achieve reasonable knowledge and experience levels to start pseudo (simulated) service delivery mode, involving high complexity and high volume of work.” (p. 13, para. 3)
Accelerate: “Ramp-up is identified as the key success factor for this phase and involves two significant challenges: learning capacity and role practice. New vendor personnel are required to quickly become productive, in a short period, placing a high demand on their learning capacity. Client personnel, on the other hand, while managing increased workload, require additional time and practice to settle their new roles. The phase ends when modifications are reasonably routinized and the joint performance of both firms reach satisfactory levels, as agreed upon in the contract, to begin actual service delivery stage.” (p. 13, para. 4)


## References

*Tiwari, Vinay, "Transition During Offshore Outsourcing: A Process Model" (2009). ICIS 2009 Proceedings. 33.
https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2009/33*
